---
layout: algorithm
title: 1.1 Numbers and more in Python!
comments: true
mathjax: true
---

## 1.1 Numbers and more in Python!

In this lecture, we will learn about numbers in Python and how to use them.

We'll learn about the following topics:

    1.) Types of Numbers in Python
    2.) Basic Arithmetic
    3.) Differences between Python 2 vs 3 in division
    4.) Object Assignment in Python

### (1) Types of numbers

Python has various "types" of numbers (numeric literals). We'll mainly focus on integers and floating point numbers.

Integers are just whole numbers, positive or negative. For example: 2 and -2 are examples of integers.

Floating point numbers in Python are notable because they have a decimal point in them, or use an exponential (e) to define the number. For example 2.0 and -2.1 are examples of floating point numbers. 4E2 (4 times 10 to the power of 2) is also an example of a floating point number in Python.

Throughout this course we will be mainly working with integers or simple float number types.

Here is a table of the two main types we will spend most of our time working with some examples:

<table border = “1“>
<caption>Numbers in Python</caption>
<tr>
    <th>Examples</th> <th>Number "Type"</th>
</tr>
<td>1,2,-5,1000</td> <td>Integers</td>
<tr>
</tr>
<td>1.2,-0.5,2e2,3E2</td> <td>Floating-point numbers</td>
<tr>
</tr>
 </table>



Now let's start with some basic arithmetic.

### (2) Basic Arithmetic


```python
# Addition
2+1
```




    3




```python
# Subtraction
2-1
```




    1




```python
# Multiplication
2*2
```




    4




```python
# Division
3/2
```




    1



### (3) Differences between Python 2 vs 3 in division
<br>
<font color='red'>**Python 3 Alert!**</font>

- In Python 2, the / symbol performs what is known as "**classic division**", this means that the decimal points are <span style="color:blue;">truncated</span> (cut off).
- In Python 3 however, a single / performs "**true division**". So you would get 1.5 if you had inputed 3/2 in Python 3.

**Question: So what do we do if we are using Python 2 to avoid this?**

**Solution 1**: Specify one of the numbers to be a float:


```python
# Specifying one of the numbers as a float
3.0/2
```




    1.5




```python
# Works for either number
3/2.0
```




    1.5



**Solution 2**: We could also "cast" the type using a function that basically turns integers into floats. This function, unsurprisingly, is called float().


```python
# We can use this float() function to cast integers as floats:
float(3) / 2
```




    1.5



**Solution 3**: Importing from a module called **`__future__`**.

This is a module in Python 2 that has Python 3 functions, this basically allows you to import Python 3 functions into Python 2. We will go over imports and modules later in the course, so don't worry about fully understanding the import statement right now!


```python
from __future__ import division
3 / 2
```




    1.5



When you import division from the **`__future__`** you won't need to worry about classic division occurring anymore anywhere in your code!

### (2) Arithmetic (continued)


```python
# Powers
2**3
```




    8




```python
# Can also do roots this way
4**0.5
```




    2.0




```python
# Order of Operations followed in Python
2 + 10 * 10 + 3
```




    105




```python
# Can use parenthesis to specify orders
(2 + 10) * (10 + 3)
```




    156



### (4) Variable Assignments

Now that we've seen how to use numbers in Python as a calculator let's see how we can assign names and create variables.

We use a single equals sign to assign labels to variables. Let's see a few examples of how we can do this.


```python
# Let's create an object called "a" and assign it the number 5
a = 5
```

Now if I call *a* in my Python script, Python will treat it as the number 5.


```python
# Adding the objects
a+a
```




    10



What happens on reassignment? Will Python let us write it over?


```python
# Reassignment
a = 10
```


```python
# Check
a
```




    10



Yes! <span style="color:blue;">Python allows you to write over assigned variable names.</span> We can also use the variables themselves when doing the reassignment. Here is an example of what I mean:


```python
# Check
a
```




    10




```python
# Use A to redefine A
a = a + a
```


```python
# Check
a
```




    20



The names you use when creating these labels need to follow a few rules:

- Names can not start with a number.
- There can be no spaces in the name, use _ instead.
- Can't use any of these symbols
```
:'",<>/?|\()!@#$%^&*~-+
```
- It's considered best practice (PEP8) that the names are lowercase.

Using variable names can be a very useful way to keep track of different variables in Python. For example:


```python
# Use object names to keep better track of what's going on in your code!
my_income = 100

tax_rate = 0.1

my_taxes = my_income*tax_rate
```


```python
# Show my taxes!
my_taxes
```




    10.0
